---
layout: post
title:  "Sovereign Cloud Stack: All good things come in threes"
category: release
author:
  - "Sovereign Cloud Stack"
avatar:
  - "SCS_logo.png"
image: "blog/r3.jpg"
---
The Sovereign Cloud Stack project, funded by the [German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs
and Climate Action](https://www.bmwi.de/Navigation/EN/Home/home.html) will release
its fourth version of the SCS reference implementation R3 on September 21, 2022.

Defined and implemented in an open development process by a community of over 20 companies,
the latest version of the SCS reference implementation brings in addition to the
update of the open source components used, among other things the possibility of
network bound disk encryption, improved test coverage, and simplified management
of Kubernetes clusters.

## Sovereign Cloud Stack as a secure foundation for the German Administrative Cloud

By participating in the working groups of [Gaia-X](https://www.gaia-x.eu/) and
the [Deutsche Verwaltungscloud-Strategie (DVS)](https://www.cio.bund.de/Web/DE/Innovative-Vorhaben/Deutsche-Verwaltungscloud-Strategie/deutsche_verwaltungscloud_strategie_node.html)
the Sovereign Cloud Stack project ensures that the project's jointly developed
standards and reference implementation also meet the requirements from these key
initiatives. The Sovereign Cloud Stack thus forms not only a technical foundation
for Gaia-X compliant infrastructure, but also for a resilient, federatable public
sector cloud.

The SCS reference implementation meets all criteria on the software and licensing side
of the [Mindestanforderungen an die Nutzung von Cloud-Angeboten durch die öffentliche
Hand](https://osb-alliance.de/verbands-news/mindestanforderungen-fuer-cloud-angebote-oeffentliche-hand)
which were published under the leadership of the Open Source Business Alliance e.V.
at the beginning of September. At the same time, SCS is designed for high security
requirements and supports platform operators in the public sector through appropriate
architecture, open development processes as well as the provision of operational
knowledge in the BSI certification according to IT-Grundschutz.[^1]

<blockquote><p>
With the Sovereign Cloud Stack project, we offer a productively deployable solution
for harnessing the potential of cloud computing that meets the requirements for
security, resilience, and the ability to shape the future of the project, thus
contributing to a significant strengthening of digital sovereignty.
</p><cite>Peter Ganten, Chairman of the Board of the Open Source Business Alliance e.V.</cite>
</blockquote>

## Technical highlights in SCS Release 3

The components included in the architecture of the reference implementation have been
updated to OpenStack Yoga, Ceph Quincy, OSISM 4.0.0, and Kubernetes Cluster API 1.2.x
with support for Kubernetes 1.25. (See figure below).

<figure class="figure mx-auto d-block" style="width:90%">
  <a href="{% asset "201001-SCS-4c.png" @path %}">
    {% asset '201001-SCS-4c.png' class="figure-img w-100" %}
  </a>
  <figcaption class="figure-caption">
    Sovereign Cloud Stack Architecture
  </figcaption>
</figure>

With Release 3 the Network Bound Disk Encryption (NBDE) is ready for productive usage.
NBDE enables cloud service providers to automatically encrypt and decrypt data carriers
and thus to prevent unauthorized access to customer data.

In cooperation with T-Systems, the Special Interest Group Monitoring of the
Sovereign Cloud Stack has been working intensively on a successor to the already proven
[`openstack-health-monitor`](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/openstack-health-monitor)
that now has been further improved by an informative dashboard. This asset allows
cloud service providers that rely on OpenStack as the underlying infrastructure layer,
to monitor the cloud environment in detail and to be able to localize problems at
an early stage. More details on the progress of the SCS project in the area of
observability can also be found in the [current October issue of the
[current October issue of the German-language Linux Magazin](https://www.linux-magazin.de/ausgaben/2022/10/observability-fuer-openstack/).

Among others, the Kubernetes cluster management used within SCS is being tested
on the development environments for the [GXFS project](https://gxfs.eu/)
and has been further improved by the lessons learned. Tools for analysis
were added each cluster now gets its own private authorization to manage the
underlying cloud resources. The rolling update of clusters to a new Kubernetes
version has been significantly simplified and upgrading, maintenance and debugging
Kubernetes clusters in SCS has been documented. The implemented components of the
CNCF ecosystem have been upgraded to the latest versions and validated through
appropriate conformance tests.

The full release notes including a reference to the consumed upstream projects
will be available at <https://scs.community/release-notes-r3> as of Wednesday.

## Enge Zusammenarbeit zwischen den Cloud-Service-Providern

<blockquote><p>
Mit SCS sind wir gemeinsam angetreten, um offene Standards zu
definieren, eine freie Referenzimplementierung zu entwickeln sowie transparentes
Betriebswissen und offene Zusammenarbeit aufzubauen. Gerade Letzteres ist in der
Industrie noch wenig verbreitet und ist uns ein zentrales Anliegen. Neben all dem
technischen Fortschritt mit Release 3 hat mich eine Beobachtung besonders gefreut.
Zwei unserer Cloud-Service-Provider haben einen halben Tag in einer gemeinsamen
Session verbracht, um das Upgrade von R2 auf R3 durchzuführen, und ich war
sehr beeindruckt, wie offen und vertrauensvoll diese neue Art der Zusammenarbeit
stattfindet. Mit so starken Spielern und diesem Mindset können wir im Bereich der
Cloud- und Container-Infrastruktur noch sehr viel erreichen.
</p><cite>Kurt Garloff, CTO des Sovereign-Cloud-Stack-Projektes bei der Open Source Business Alliance</cite>
</blockquote>

## Erweiterte Testautomatisierung stellt hohe Qualität sicher

Gemeinsam mit OSISM wurde die Testabdeckung des in der Referenzimplementierung
eingesetzten Deployment- und Lifecycle-Management-Frameworks erweitert, wodurch
ein deutlich schnelleres Upgrade der eingesetzten Umgebungen ermöglicht wird.
Die enge Zusammenarbeit zwischen den Cloud-Service-Providern sowie die Erweiterung
der Testabdeckung haben nicht zuletzt dafür gesorgt, dass ein wesentlicher Teil
der Infrastrukturen bereits vor der offiziellen Freigabe des Release 3 aktualisiert
werden konnten. Ziel des Sovereign Cloud Stack Projektes ist es, Infrastrukturbetreiber
in die Lage zu versetzen, auch täglich ein Upgrade der Umgebungen durchführen zu können.

## Dritter Public-Cloud-Provider öffnet seine Pforten

Nach [OSISM](https://osism.tech/) und [PlusServer](https://www.plusserver.com/)
setzt nun auch [Wavecon](https://www.wavecon.de/) – eine 100%ige Tochter
der [noris network AG](https://www.noris.de/) – auf die SCS-Referenzimplementierung zum Aufbau und Betrieb
einer vollständig offenen, standardisierten souveränen Public-Cloud. Mit dem [Wavestack](https://www.noris.de/wavestack-cloud-demo)
bringt damit zeitgleich zum Release 3 der dritte Public-Cloud-Provider sein Angebot
an den Markt.

<blockquote><p>
"Mit Sovereign Cloud Stack setzen wir auf eine Lösung, die den Aufbau und den
Betrieb einer modernen Cloud- und Containerlösung, insbesondere durch die aktive
Community, wesentlich erleichtert. Der offene Entwicklungsprozess ermöglicht uns
direkten Einfluss auf das Projekt zu nehmen und dieses aktiv mitzugestalten.
Partnerschaftliche Zusammenarbeit und das transparente Teilen von Betriebswissen
sind wesentlicher Kern unserer Firmenphilosophie."
</p><cite>Cemil Degirmenci, CEO der Wavecon GmbH</cite>
</blockquote>

## About Sovereign Cloud Stack

The Sovereign Cloud Stack (SCS) was launched in 2019 and initially funded by the
Federal Agency for Disruptive Innovations - SPRIND. Since July 2021, SCS is a
project of the Open Source Business Alliance and receives funding by the German
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action (BMWK).
A growing community of more than 20 companies contribute to the success of Sovereign
Cloud Stack. By joining forces, standards for a modern, federatable open source
cloud and container platform are defined and implemented by using proven open source
components. At the same time, operational knowledge and practices are
transparently shared to minimize the difficulty of delivering high-quality and secure
cloud offerings. Three providers are already using SCS in production
environments to offer public cloud services. Further setups are in the development
and testing phases.

## About the Open Source Business Alliance (OSB Alliance)

The Open Source Business Alliance (OSB Alliance) is the association of the open
source industry in Germany. We represent over 190 member companies that employ
approximately 10,000 people and generate more than 1.7 billion euros annually
in Germany. Together with scientific institutions and user organisations, we
are committed to sustainably anchoring the central importance of open source
software and open standards for a successful digital transformation in the
public awareness. This digital transformation should benefit companies, the
state and society alike. In addition, innovations in the field of open source
should be promoted. Our goal is to establish open source as the standard in
public procurement and in research and business promotion. After all, open
source and open standards are essential foundations for digital sovereignty,
innovative capacity and security in the digital transformation and thus the
answer to one of the greatest challenges of our time.

[^1]: see Deutsche Verwaltungscloud-Strategie: Rahmenwerk der Zielarchitektur, Beschluss des IT-Planungsrats as of 2021-10-29
