---
layout: post
title:  "Gaia-X implementation phase starts for GXFS and SCS "
author: 
  - "Open Source Business Alliance"
  - "eco - Verband der Internetwirtschaft e.V."
avatar: 
  - "logo-osba.svg"
  - "logo-eco.svg"
image: "blog/foundation.jpg"
---
## Sovereign Cloud Stack and Gaia-X Federation Services provide an open source toolbox for Gaia-X

Cologne/Berlin – June 01, 2022 – The two Gaia-X projects Sovereign Cloud Stack (SCS) and Gaia-X
Federation Services (GXFS), which are funded by the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs
and Climate Action, are combined and tested together on open infrastructure in the now beginning
implementation phase. The goal of the two projects that have been launched last year is to create
an fully open toolkit for sovereign, standardized and federable cloud infrastructure. This technical
foundation represents an important contribution of Germany to the pan-European Gaia-X project and
enables organizations to become part of the new digital ecosystem.

_"With the deployment of the Gaia-X Federation Services on an Sovereign Cloud Stack implementation
that is already in productive use on the market, we have come an important step closer to the goal
of Gaia-X and the two funding projects. The resulting open source toolbox for sovereign data
infrastructure creates an important basic prerequisite for the innovation capability of companies and
public administrations in the cloud,"_ says Peter Ganten, Chairman of the Board of the Open Source
Business Alliance e.V.

_"By aligning and implementing the defined standards into productively usable software, the two
projects are creating concrete benefits for our users. Together we‘re building structures and an
open community that can ensure further progress,"_ rejoices Kurt Garloff, technical lead of the SCS
project at OSB Alliance.

The purpose of the Gaia-X Federation Services is to make the Gaia-X ecosystem operational. All
services from the GXFS toolbox are currently being developed on a reference implementation of SCS.
Therefore, Kubernetes clusters based on the emerging SCS standard are provided to GXFS implementation
partners and operated on fully sovereign infrastructure.

_"Together we have laid the foundations for Gaia-X and thus for an open, transparent and secure
digital ecosystem,"_ says Andreas Weiss, GXFS project manager and head of the digital business
models division at eco - Verband der Internetwirtschaft e. V. _"We now have the technical framework
to use data and services sovereignly across sector-specific data spaces - and thus to strengthen
the sovereignty of the European digital economy."_

**Visitors of the Hannover Messe can meet Gaia-X at hall 8, booth 24.**

## About Gaia-X Federation Services
Innovation through digital sovereignty – that’s the goal of Gaia-X. This is
achieved by establishing an ecosystem in which data is made available, collated
and shared in a trustworthy environment where users always retain sovereignty
over their data. What emerges is not a cloud, but a federated system that links
many cloud service providers and users together.

The Gaia-X Federation Services (GXFS) represent the minimum technical requirements
needed to build and operate a cloud-based, self-determined data infrastructure
ecosystem. On the basis of technical specifications, services are developed based
on an open source code. These will be further developed into operational services
by the Gaia-X community and continuously improved.

Led by eco, the GXFS-DE project is also funded by the German Federal Ministry of
Economic Affairs and Climate Action and is in close exchange with the Gaia-X
Association for Data and Cloud (AISBL) and the French funded project GXFS-FR.

## About eco - Verband der Internetwirtschaft e.V.
With over 1,000 member companies, eco is the largest Internet industry association
in Europe. Since 1995 eco has been highly instrumental in shaping the Internet,
fostering new technologies, forming framework conditions, and representing the
interests of members in politics and international committees. eco’s key topics
are the reliability and strengthening of digital infrastructure, IT security and
trust, as well as ethically-oriented digitalisation. eco advocates for a free,
technologically-neutral, and high-performance Internet.

## About Sovereign Cloud Stack Projekt
The Sovereign Cloud Stack (SCS) was launched in 2019 and initially funded by the Federal Agency
for Disruptive Innovations - SPRIND. Since July 2021, SCS is a project of the Open Source Business
Alliance and receives funding by the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action
(BMWK, formerly BMWi). A growing community of more than 20 companies contribute to the success of
Sovereign Cloud Stack. By joining forces, standards for a modern, federatable open source cloud and
container platform are defined and implemented by using proven open source components.

At the same time, operational knowledge and practices are transparently shared to minimize the
difficulty of delivering high-quality and secure cloud offerings. Two (soon three) providers are
already using SCS in production environments to offer public cloud services. Further setups are in the
development and testing phases.

## About Open Source Business Alliance - Bundesverband für digitale Souveränität e.V. (OSB Alliance)
The Open Source Business Alliance (OSB Alliance) is the association of the open source industry in Germany.
We represent over 170 member companies that employ approximately 10,000 people and generate more than 1.7 billion
euros annually in Germany. Together with scientific institutions and user organisations, we are committed to
sustainably anchoring the central importance of open source software and open standards for a successful digital
transformation in the public awareness. This digital transformation should benefit companies, the state and
society alike. In addition, innovations in the field of open source should be promoted. Our goal is to establish
open source as the standard in public procurement and in research and business promotion. After all, open source
and open standards are essential foundations for digital sovereignty, innovative capacity and security in the digital
transformation and thus the answer to one of the greatest challenges of our time.