---
layout: post
title:  "SCS R2 released"
category: release
author:
  - "Sovereign Cloud Stack"
avatar: 
  - "SCS_logo.png"
image: "blog/pile.jpg"
---

The Sovereign Cloud Stack project, funded by the [German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs
and Climate Action](https://www.bmwi.de/Navigation/EN/Home/home.html) will release
its third version of the SCS reference implementation R2 on March 23, 2022. 
Highlights of Release 2, to whose success a community of over 20 companies have 
contributed are updates of the integrated open source components, the simplified
deployment on bare metal, significantly improved management of Kubernetes clusters,
as well as the technical foundations for connecting to the [Gaia-X Federation Services (GXFS)](https://www.gxfs.eu/).

Defined and implemented in an open development process, the technology of [Sovereign
Cloud Stack (SCS)](https://scs.community/de/) is being tested by a growing
number of companies and public IT service providers. In addition, two (soon three)
providers are already using SCS in production environments to offer public cloud
services. The C5 certification of our partner [plusserver](https://www.plusserver.com/en/)
also proves that the Sovereign Cloud Stack meets the high security requirements
of the [German Federal Office for Information Security (BSI)](https://www.bsi.bund.de/EN/Home).

By participating in the working groups of [Gaia-X](https://www.gaia-x.eu/) and
the [Deutsche Verwaltungscloud-Strategie (DVS)](https://www.cio.bund.de/Webs/CIO/DE/digitale-loesungen/digitale-souveraenitaet/deutsche-verwaltungscloud-strategie/deutsche-verwaltungscloud-strategie-node.html) 
the Sovereign Cloud Stack project ensures that the project's jointly developed
standards and reference implementation also meet the requirements from these key
initiatives. The Sovereign Cloud Stack thus forms not only a technical foundation
for Gaia-X compliant infrastructure, but also for a resilient, federatable public
sector cloud.

The key points for Release 3, due in the fall of 2022, will be the completion of the
disk encryption feature, the expansion of federation capabilities, and the development
of fully automated SCS conformance tests. The latter are intended to enable already
established cloud service providers to adapt and validate their own offerings to the
established SCS standards.

The goal of Sovereign Cloud Stack is to develop a fully open-source toolkit for
sovereign, standardized cloud & container infrastructure. Consumers of such
infrastructure can thus painlessly manage services across multiple SCS-compliant
offerings.

<blockquote><p>
Through open source, open standards, and
an open development process, Sovereign Cloud Stack makes an important contribution
to minimize lock-in effects in the cloud business, creating freedom of choice and thus
strengthening the progress of digitalization in Europe - with full control over
technology and data.
</p><cite>Peter Ganten, Chairman of the Board of the Open Source Business Alliance e.V.</cite>
</blockquote> 

## Technical highlights in SCS Release 2

In detail, the following technical highlights, among others, were realized with Release 2:

* Update of core components to OpenStack Xena, OSISM 3.0.0, and Kubernetes Cluster
API 1.0.x with added support for Kubernetes 1.22 and 1.23.

* Automation of bare metal deployment has been massively extended. The configuration
of the components is now managed by NetBox as central source of truth. This means
that setups with a high number of machines can be deployed with a manageable
operational effort.

* The Kubernetes Cluster API-based automation for managing Kubernetes clusters is
now designed to manage many differently configured clusters. Clusters can now be
created in different projects and availability zones and are also independent of
each other's configuration. This allows for different Kubernetes versions, different
network integration (CNI), different numbers and flavors of machines as well as an
independent selection of standard services. The configuration can be maintained in a
git repository. 

* Standard services within Kubernetes container management have been extended by
flux (gitops) and cert-manager (certificate management), the ingress-nginx has
been enhanced and cilium can now be used instead of calico for the
cluster network integration.
DevOps teams thus do not have to worry about integration of these components.

* The quality of our stack is constantly assured by conformance tests
of the Cloud Native Computing Foundation and the Open Infrastructure Foundation.

* The SCS standards for image metadata and machine flavor naming published with
Release 1 have been fully implemented. Thus, it is easier to develop automated
installations (Infrastructure-as-Code) without having to deal with numerous
little differences for different cloud offerings.

* The required components to connect to the Gaia-X Federation Services (GXFS)
have been completed. The Gaia-X Federation Services will allow to connect the
various Gaia-X services. Thus, a very important milestone of SCS for Gaia-X has
been reached.

The [full release notes](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/release-notes/blob/main/Release2.md)
will be available on GitHub at <https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/Docs/>
as of Wednesday.

## About Sovereign Cloud Stack

The Sovereign Cloud Stack (SCS) was launched in 2019 and initially funded by the
Federal Agency for Disruptive Innovations - SPRIND. Since July 2021, SCS is a
project of the Open Source Business Alliance and receives funding by the German
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action (BMWK, formerly BMWi).
A growing community of more than 20 companies contribute to the success of Sovereign
Cloud Stack. By joining forces, standards for a modern, federatable open source
cloud and container platform are defined and implemented by using proven open source
components. At the same time, operational knowledge and <nobr>practices</nobr> are
transparently shared to minimize the difficulty of delivering high-quality and secure
cloud offerings. Two (soon three) providers are already using SCS in production
environments to offer public cloud services. Further setups are in the development
and testing phases.

## About the Open Source Business Alliance (OSB Alliance)

The Open Source Business Alliance (OSB Alliance) is the association of the open
source industry in Germany. We represent over 170 member companies that employ
approximately 10,000 people and generate more than 1.7 billion euros annually
in Germany. Together with scientific institutions and user organisations, we
are committed to sustainably anchoring the central importance of open source
software and open standards for a successful digital transformation in the
public awareness. This digital transformation should benefit companies, the
state and society alike. In addition, innovations in the field of open source
should be promoted. Our goal is to establish open source as the standard in
public procurement and in research and business promotion. After all, open
source and open standards are essential foundations for digital sovereignty,
innovative capacity and security in the digital transformation and thus the
answer to one of the greatest challenges of our time.
