---
layout: post
title:  "SCS Release 6 published"
category: release
author:
  - "Sovereign Cloud Stack"
avatar:
  - "SCS_logo.png"
image: "six.jpg"
-
# Sovereign full-stack cloud solution
## Sovereign Cloud Stack publishes Release 6

**Berlin, 20.03.2024**: The Sovereign Cloud Stack project publishes its sixth release. 

Release 6 focuses on the SCS Kubernetes Distribution Cluster Stacks, which can
be rolled out directly on the IaaS reference implementation via the Cluster
Stack Operator. The reference implementation now also includes the
Observability Platform and enhanced Identity and Access Management. The
collaboration with ALASCA e.V. has resulted in enhanced speed and scope in the
development of comprehensive open standards, in line with the requirements of
the German Administrative Cloud Strategy. Overall, SCS Release 6 offers an
easy-to-operate, sovereign full-stack cloud solution.

SCS provides all the cloud technology foundations for realizing digital
sovereignty and implementing open source strategies. Many users of cloud
services from the public sector, but also from the private sector and science,
expect "cloud" to be container-based technology that can ideally be hosted and
operated in a digitally sovereign manner. This is now even easier to achieve:
SCS offers a digitally sovereign, secure, complete, standardized open source
container layer as the basis for all containerized applications.

### SCS Full Stack: Unification of IaaS and KaaS reference implementation completed

Release 6 introduces the Cluster Stacks, the second version of the Kubernetes
as a Service reference implementation from SCS, which can now be seamlessly
rolled out on the Infrastructure as a Service layer from SCS thanks to the
implementation of the Cluster Stack Operator. The cluster stacks are fully
implemented with Kubernetes on-board tools such as operators and thus replace
the old implementation, which still integrated and automated the cluster API
with the help of scripts. The cluster stacks are complemented with identity and
access management and an observability platform which ensure that the stack is
more secure and easier to operate.

SCS thus offers an integrated full-stack cloud solution that combines a
scalable, secure cloud infrastructure and a container platform that can be
developed and tested according to the latest requirements. SCS continues to
offer a fully open standards-based software solution developed openly by many
contributors, which can be influenced and shaped by operators and users and
offers a high degree of transparency - the perfect basis for driving digitally
sovereign innovation at all levels in Germany and Europe.

### Cooperation on standardization

In the fall of last year, the cooperation between the SCS project and ALASCA
e.V. was intensified once again. The further development of open standards, as
called for in the German Administrative Cloud Strategy, for example, is at the
forefront of this cooperation. Release 6 shows how fruitful this cooperation
already is, with examples of SCS standards including

* New stable version 4 for the SCS-compatible IaaS certification.
* New draft version 1 for the new SCS-compatible KaaS certification.

For the operators of SCS cloud environments, it is an advantage that the
implementation of the standards and the resulting certification provides them
with a simple quality criterion (in the best sense of the word) that relates
not only to interoperability and openness, but also to robustness, security and
up-to-dateness. In this way, they not only assure their customers of the
quality of their offering, but also themselves. Of course, interoperability is
of particular interest to users: they can roll out their workloads on the
clouds of multiple operators without any major surprises, which gives them a
high degree of flexibility and in some cases may be a prerequisite to open up
an alternative to the large hyperscalers (AWS, Google, Azure).

### Simple operation of cloud environments

Overall, Release 6 makes it clear that SCS cloud infrastructure can be operated
efficiently: this was and is one of the central value propositions of the SCS
project, alongside control and simple provisioning for end users. The operating
tools have been consistently expanded to simplify everyday work steps for the
operating staff. The continuous standardization of further aspects and
especially the implementation of the standards by providers who do not use the
IaaS reference implementation underline the relevance of the standardization
work. With the latest developments and the release of Cluster Stacks for
OpenStack, deployment environments for Kubernetes clusters are easier and more
efficient to manage.

In the reference environment, a standardized Kubernetes environment is now also
available at the infrastructure level, into which operators can integrate their
own tools (e.g. for billing or capacity management); with the Identity and
Access Management (IAM) from the SCS reference implementation, a supplied
service also makes use of this integration option. The expansion of the SCS
documentation also contributes directly to the efficient operation of SCS cloud
environments; examples, instructions and links to the repositories make the
structure of SCS clear, comprehensible and efficient.

### About the Sovereign Cloud Stack Project

SCS has been funded by the German Federal Ministry of Economics and Climate
Protection (BMWK) since July 2021 and is run by the Open Source Business
Alliance - Bundesverband für digitale Souveränität e.V.. A growing,
international ecosystem of now over 25 companies contributes to the success of
the Sovereign Cloud Stack with over 50 software developers. Together, open
standards for a modern, federatable open source cloud and container platform
are defined and implemented in an open development process using proven open
source components. At the same time, operational knowledge and practice is
being made transparently available to minimize the difficulty of delivering
high-quality and secure cloud services. Already six providers are using SCS
technology productively to operate truly sovereign and GDPR-compliant public
cloud offerings. Additional SCS-based cloud infrastructure (public and private
clouds) is under construction. SCS also contributes to Gaia-X and provides the
development platform for the Gaia-X Federation Services / Cross-Federation
Service Components (GXFS/XFSC).

### About the Open Source Business Alliance (OSB Alliance) e.V.

The Open Source Business Alliance (OSB Alliance) is the association of the open
source industry in Germany. It represents over 200 member companies that
generate more than EUR 126 billion annually in total. Together with scientific
institutions and user organizations, it works to sustainably anchor the central
importance of open source software and open standards for a successful digital
transformation in the public awareness. In addition, innovations in the field
of open source are to be promoted. The goal of the OSB Alliance is to establish
open source as a standard in public procure­ment and in research and business
development. After all, open source and open standards are compelling
foundations for digital sovereignty, innovation capability and security in the
digital transformation and thus the answer to one of the greatest challenges of
our time.

### Related links:

Sovereign Cloud Stack: https://scs.community/

Technical Documentation SCS: https://docs.scs.community/docs

SCS Repositories: https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack

Release notes: https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/release-notes

SCS’s notion of digital sovereignty: https://the-report.cloud/why-digital-sovereignty-is-more-than-mere-legal-compliance/ and https://link.springer.com/epdf/10.1007/s11623-022-1669-5?sharing_token=ie7xTVzv_afod07w5Y2lJfe4RwlQNchNByi7wbcMAY4yFyxh9Qw2iCtygUYjun7MI5leBYqiHZBlIeTPv8Sm1Wv8c1dEUf6ebSwnRfo99_nAYh2FgwUyIHjFyZFWv_EIOEIetr2eBSiAPrI68ptBgKxMVkNlS4udZRAhx1X-WB8= 

Release Blog Posts: https://scs.community/de/2023/12/27/scs-r6-enables/ und https://scs.community/de/2024/02/01/road-ro-r6/ 

Contact: OSB Alliance e.V.

Copyright picture: Engin Akyurd
