---
layout: post
title:  "Sovereign Cloud Stack R7 released"
category: release
author:
  - "Sovereign Cloud Stack"
avatar:
  - "SCS_logo.png"
image: "scs7-948-648.jpg"
---
# Turnkey Solution for Cloud Computing - Sovereign Cloud Stack Publishes Release 7

**Berlin, 2024-09-11**: Turnkey solution for Cloud Computing – Sovereign Cloud Stack publishes release 7

The Sovereign Cloud Stack (SCS) provides a complete set of base technology
for the realization of digital sovereignty and open source strategy. SCS
offers a digitally sovereign, secure, comprehensive, standardized,
and open solution for the virtualization and container layers as base for
containerized applications. The software implements the certifiable SCS
standards that have been prepared with the users and operators of SCS.
After some years of real-world usage, there is quite some experience and
knowledge available, especially around operational topics.

## SCS Turnkey Solution

An important focus of the release 7 (R7) development cycle was to more
closely interlink the various components of our modular software stack,
aiming to make it easier for operators to use the complete SCS stack.
Beyond some improvements in the installation automation, the end-to-end
installation manual is worth mentioning, encompassing all significant
components. One part of the integration work was the Central API project,
which is meant to expose the functionality of user, virtualization,
and container management behind one API and which is available as technical
preview.

## Strengthening of Upstream Technology

Without open source technologies such as Linux, Ceph, OpenStack, or
Kubernetes, SCS would be unthinkable. The members of the SCS community
(both OSBA employees in the SCS project team as well as contractors and
users) are active members of the respective upstream communities and
contribute to the technology there. SCS' strategic direction is to
avoid doing improvements exclusively in our own downstream implementation
but puts focus on aligning with the upstream technology communities.
This is sometimes slower, but results in a more sustainable development
process. Current examples are contributions from the SCS
community to the domain-manager role in OpenStack, the work on
the Cluster-API-Provider for OpenStack to ensure that several control
plane nodes of a Kubernetes cluster do not (accidentially) end up on the
same underlaying hardware node (hypervisor) or the work on comprehensive
encryption of internal connections in kolla-ansible. The first two
examples will be part of the next release of SCS and have not yet trickled
back to R7.

## Current Software

SCS R7 is shipped with current OpenStack (2024.1 Caracal) which can be operated
on several Linux distributions: Ubuntu 22.04 LTS continues to be supported;
Ubuntu 24.04 LTS, Debian 12 and CentOS Stream 9 (and thus RHEL9) have been added. VPN-as-a-Service
is now also supported and validated with the modern software-defined-networking
technology OVN that we have used by default for some years now. The latest version
of Ceph (Reef) and Deployment of Ceph via rook are available as Technical
Previews and can evaluated already as replacement for the proven Ceph Quincy
deployed with ceph-ansible.

A lot of improvements went into Cluster Stacks. They are using the current
version of Cluster API (v1.8) and the current Cluster-API-Provider for OpenStack
(v0.10) which finally promises a stable API. Recent versions of Kubernetes
(v1.30/1.31) have been validated. Cluster Stacks can now also use any OCI registry
for their resources, facilitating the usage of own versions without requiring github
releases. Own Node-Images can easily be provided via your own object storage.
Using infrastructure with a private TLS certificate authority for the API is
now supported.

Usage of Cluster Stacks outside of SCS-conforming infrastructure is growing,
e.g. on Hetzer Cloud. This strengthens the technology and is proof that the
framework is as flexible as we designed it to be. On SCS infra, we have
successfully enabled Kamaji (as a technical preview) as an option, where the
control planes of several workload clusters can be in a shared cluster in order
to reduce the overhead of creating many clusters. 

The most important improvement under the hood of Cluster Stacks are the
so-called multi-stage-addons. With their help, we can correctly deal
with version dependencies between components, e.g. in case of cluster
version upgrades. This helps to ensure a seamless availability of the
cluster during upgrades. The old Kubernetes-as-a-Service v1 technology
was deprecated before and will now no longer be actively maintained.
Any users still using it should move to cluster stacks urgently now.

## Operational Aspects and Security

The OpenStack Health Monitor has proven really useful to monitor the
virtualization layer in SCS. The code has aged though and a new implementation
was created. It uses modern technology and can easily be extended with
container scenario tests. Maintenance and further development has been
simplified by this transition significantly.

Another significant investment in securing the technology happened with
the support from specialized penetration testers. We also automated the
penetration tests in a CI pipeline, so they are run regularly or to validate
changes. This continous security assessment is an important contribution
to defend against growing cybersecurity threats.

## SCS-compliant with Open Standards

Next to the work on the reference implementation, there was progress in the
area of standards and certification.
back in May, [it was shown](https://scs.community/2024/05/13/cost-of-making-an-openstack-cluster-scs-compliant/)
that SCS-compatible IaaS-v4 compliance can be achieved with moderate effort
using Yaook, an implementation that is completely independent of the SCS
reference implementataion.
New partnes have been added to the
[list of SCS-Clouds](https://docs.scs.community/standards/certification/overview/#compliant-cloud-environments):
AOV, SysEleven, and with Proof-of-Concept environments the KDO Service
GmbH as well as Cloud&Heat Technologies GmbH. SysEleven is not using
the SCS reference implementation either. Next to the automated daily
SCS standards compliance checks, the new SCS Compliance Monitor (currently
still in test operation) gives a more detailed view on single passed or
failed tests and also prepares for transparency on future optional
requirements.

### Further Links

- [Sovereign Cloud Stack](https://scs.community/)
- [Technical documentation SCS](https://docs.scs.community/docs)
- [SCS repositories](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack)
- [Release notes](https://docs.scs.community/docs/category/releases)
- [SCS notion of digital Sovereignty](https://the-report.cloud/why-digital-sovereignty-is-more-than-mere-legal-compliance/)

### About the Sovereign Cloud Stack Project

SCS has been funded by the German Federal Ministry of Economics and Climate
Protection (BMWK) since July 2021 and is run by the Open Source Business
Alliance - Bundesverband für digitale Souveränität e.V.. A growing,
international ecosystem of now over 25 companies contributes to the success of
the Sovereign Cloud Stack with over 50 software developers.
The SCS project provides a fully open reference implementation for a complete
and production-ready cloud stack. In addition, open
standards for a modern, federatable open source cloud and container platform
are defined together and implemented in an open development process using proven open
source components. At the same time, operational knowledge and practice is
being made transparently available to minimize the difficulty of delivering
high-quality and secure cloud services. Already six providers are using SCS
technology productively to operate truly sovereign and GDPR-compliant public
cloud offerings. Additional SCS-based cloud infrastructure (public and private
clouds) is under construction. SCS also contributes to
[Gaia-X](https://gaia-x.eu/) and provides the
development platform for the Gaia-X Federation Services / Cross-Federation
Service Components ([GXFS](https://www.gxfs.eu/)/XFSC).
