On the digital summit 2019 in Dortmund, the [GAIA-X project](https://www.data-infrastructure.eu/) was launched by the german ministry of economic affairs and energy (BMWi). The goal of Gaia-X is the defintion and the setup of a secure and trustworthy data infrastructure for Europe. One of the defining properties of the targeted solution is the usage of open technologies.

<blockquote class="blockquote mb-3">
	<p>With the Sovereign Cloud Stack, the GAIA-X project is increasingly being filled with life. As a contribution to European digital sovereignty, the technical foundation, the Cloud Stack, is to be implemented as an open source project in order to enable switching providers in the future. It will make it easier for medium-sized companies, but also for public administrations, to use the advantages of GAIA-X in specific projects. The Sovereign Cloud Stack will be closely linked to the core components of GAIA-X, the so-called Federation Services, the creation of which is also funded by the BMWi and is well advanced. Together with other funding measures such as the GAIA-X funding competition or for future investments in the vehicle industry (KoPa35c), the BMWi is lending considerable momentum to the implementation of GAIA-X.</p>
	<footer class="blockquote-footer">Thomas Jarzombek (Member of the German Parliament), BMWi representative for the digital economy and start-ups</footer>
</blockquote>

The complete press release can also be found on our News page. An FAQ (in German) is available at the [OSB Alliance](https://osb-alliance.de/sovereign-cloud-stack-scs). The OSB Alliance is hiring a growing team for the project.