Englisch

# SCS: We continue to work on Gaia-X for more digital sovereignty

Kurt Garloff, 2021-11-26

## Context

The second Gaia-X Summit took place on November 18 and 19, 2021, in which
concepts were introduced of how Gaia-X enables rule-based federated data
ecosystems to emerge and represent a well-functioning, trustworthy basis for
data-based innovation.

The summit was overshadowed by Scaleway's visible exit from Gaia-X. Scaleway
expressed disappointment with the slow progress and believes that the broad
involvement of the hyperscalers is the reason for this and there is a risk that
it will lead the project to develop in the wrong direction and in the end
little for digital sovereignty is achieved.

This was picked up sporadically in the press and viewed as evidence that the
suspicion that had long been held that Gaia-X as an initiative initiated by
politics, a club of large corporations, an initiative embraced by the
hyperscalers, as a dish with too many cooks, ... was bound to fail, now has
proven to really fail.

We, as SCS project, continue to believe in Gaia-X's goals. While some
shortcomings exist, we have no reason to dismiss Gaia-X as a helpful initiative.

## Cooperation between OSB Alliance and Gaia-X

The OSB Alliance (OSBA) has been a Gaia-X member since summer 2021, but has
already accompanied the founding process of the Gaia-X project through personal
commitment and OSBA members such as PlusServer since the beginning of 2020.

The OSB Alliance is leading a significant project with the Sovereign Cloud
Stack (SCS) project, which is funded by the BMWi (German Ministry for Economic
Affairs and Energy) and provides technology that makes it much easier for
infrastructure operators to provide Gaia-X-compliant, sovereign infrastructure.
As such, it is involved in some work groups with its community and its
employees and helps shaping the work, e.g. in the provider work group of
Gaia-X. The SCS project is also anchored here as an open work package.

## Expectations and Gaia-X reality

The expectations of Gaia-X are high and very varied. In some cases
unrealistically high, to which statements from politics such as "Moonshot" have
certainly contributed. In many cases, goals were projected onto Gaia-X that did
not correspond to reality at all, such as the hope that a European hyperscaler
would arise through government intervention with the help of Gaia-X, which
would suppress the worrisome influence of the American platforms.

The approach of Gaia-X is different: Verifiable standards are to be created,
with the help of which transparency is created, which allows services from
different providers to be combined automatically. The transparency should not
only ensure technical compatibility and characterize the corresponding
interfaces, but in particular also contain aspects such as control, security
and data protection. These enable users to make a conscious decision as to
which combination of offers meets their requirements. The transparency of
European data protection regulations thus also allows legally compliant use.
The transparency is represented by certifiable and verifiable
self-descriptions, which are kept in a catalog by the federator.
Self-descriptions are defined in the corresponding Gaia-X working groups,
filled out by the service provider and, if necessary, checked and confirmed by
certifiers (Conformance Assessment Bodies). An open source implementation of a
distributed catalog is being created, among other things, in the GXFS project -
another project funded by the BMWi to strengthen Gaia-X.

The path to these standards is not an easy one. Many contributors have to come
to an agreement so that the quality is right and there is also acceptance. This
may be frustrating at times, but it is in the nature of things. A dominant
company with an integrated architecture can advance faster than an ecosystem in
which several actors at different levels have to agree on a common
interoperable interface. With a top-down approach, you make decisions faster
than with broad participation. This does not make them any better - in the long
term, the arduous path is the more effective. It is important that the
professional competence from the practical implementation is also included in
the decisions and that the processes run transparently. Communication is not
always easy in rapidly growing structures like Gaia-X, but things are moving
forward.

## Gaia-X is not just theory

All theory remains theory if nobody puts it into practice. In fact, there is a
lot of discussion about concepts and standards in the working groups and
committees of the Gaia-X AISBL and little implementation is visible. That is of
course risky. In our experience, good, practicable and accepted standards are
almost always created in close exchange and an iterative process with an
implementation. And, of course, open standards are best developed in parallel
with fully open implementations.

The reality in Gaia-X is better than it looks at first. There are some groups
working on the implementation of Gaia-X concepts. There are the major projects
funded by the BMWi such as the Gaia-X Federation Services (GXFS,
https://gxfs.de/), where, based on detailed specifications, code on the topics
of compliance, data sovereignty services, identity & trust, federated catalog
and the Portal are to be developed. The Sovereign Cloud Stack Project (SCS,
https://scs.community/) published Release 1 in September 2021 and is already
being used in production by cloud providers. SCS is being developed as
completely free software by an open community in an open process. GXFS is also
under an OSS license.

There are also funding projects from the BMWi funding competition, a French
project to supplement Federation Services, the Eclipse Data Connector, work in
Catena-X and numerous initiatives by companies and groups around Gaia-X. Many
of them come together in the work package "Minimal Viable Gaia" and take part
in the second Gaia-X Hackathon on the 2nd + 3rd. December - technology is
actually developed and tested there.

Unfortunately, little of this was visible at the Gaia-X Summit - the presentation
of the highlights from the hackathon at the summit unfortunately didn't fit
because of the ordering of the events on the schedule.

## Labels beyond data protection

The concept of so-called labels was presented at the Gaia-X Summit. These are
the certificates with which services and providers show their conformity with
Gaia-X standards. Behind this are criteria and the associated test catalogs,
which must be verified accordingly (ideally in an automated manner). It will be
necessary to look closely at the details - of course, the goals of a high level
of transparency and digital sovereignty would not only be missed but even
counteracted by too soft criteria catalogs.

It makes sense to have different levels of conformity. This also includes and
makes transparent offers that do not meet high standards in the area of
data protection. Interoperability and transparency are still an
added value - not all IT services and data have high data protection and
sovereignty requirements. American hyperscalers can also make a valuable
contribution at this level.

The three levels of basic, substantial and high outlined in Gaia-X are based on
the corresponding levels of ENISA in the European Cybersecurity Scheme for
Cloud Services. At the highest level, access from outside Europe would be
excluded with a high degree of security - this can only be guaranteed with
platforms that are completely under the operational control of European
companies.

This means that the area of data protection is well mapped by Gaia-X Labels and
it makes sense to link it to proven standards in this area.

However, digital sovereignty goes far beyond data protection.

The ability to innovate and design digital platforms requires the ability to
give users control over the technology and its implementation. This can hardly
be represented with proprietary technology stacks, but requires a completely
open technology stack. This is exactly what we are working on in the Sovereign
Cloud Stack project and see the combination with other free technologies in the
Gaia-X environment (and in the future IPCEI-CIS) such as GXFS as an attractive
combination for companies that can be federated and interoperable for their own
use or for third parties and want to offer completely sovereign services.

Unfortunately, this important aspect of digital sovereignty has not yet been
taken into account in the description of the Gaia-X labels - we expect that
further development will take place here and are also working towards this as
part of our cooperation in the Gaia-X working groups and open work packages.

