---
layout: post
title:  "Looking back at a successful year: Sovereign Cloud Stack Community Summit 2021"
author: "Eduard Itrich"
avatar:
  - "eitrich.jpg"
image:
  - "summit2021/dont-go-alone.png"
---

Dear Community,

we thank you from the deepest of our hearts for your participation in this year's - and at the same time first - [SCS Community Summit on December 15, 2021](https://eventyay.com/e/cf85f6e7). Though we were originally so much looking forward to meeting you all in person at Cloud Expo in Frankfurt and toasting together on site, the current pandemic situation has forced us to an alternative format. True to the motto *8-Bit Retro Edition*, this year's community meeting took place in the specially created [SCS Maschinenraum](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/scs-maschinenraum) and offered virtual space for presentations, discussions and talks. To still create at least some congress feeling, we organized a sticker exchange, so that all participants received an *adventure package*. Thank you very much for your contributions and support!

<figure class="figure mx-auto d-block" style="width:70%">
  <a href="{{ assets["summit2021/sticker-exchange-2021.jpg"].digest_path }}">
    {% asset 'summit2021/sticker-exchange-2021.jpg' class="figure-img w-100" %}
  </a>
</figure>

[Stephan Ilaender](https://www.linkedin.com/in/stephan-ilaender-128b365/) and [Felix Kronlage-Dammers](https://www.linkedin.com/in/felix-kronlage-dammers-9378a6184/) kicked off the summit with two keynote talks from the community. We have collected all slides at the end of this blog post.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col">
        <figure class="figure mx-auto d-block" style="width:70%">
            <a href="{{ assets["summit2021/screenshot-stephan.png"].digest_path }}">
              {% asset 'summit2021/screenshot-stephan.png' class="figure-img w-100" %}
            </a>
        </figure>
     </div>
    <div class="col">
        <figure class="figure mx-auto d-block" style="width:70%">
          <a href="{{ assets["summit2021/screenshot-fkr.png"].digest_path }}">
            {% asset 'summit2021/screenshot-fkr.png' class="figure-img w-100" %}
          </a>
        </figure>
    </div>
</div>

Afterwards, [Kurt Garloff](/garloff), [Dr. Manuela Urban](/urban), [Dirk Loßack](/lossack) and [Eduard Itrich](/itrich) gave an overview of the past and eventful year of SCS, presented a travel guide to the Sovereign Cloud Stack community, and an overview of past and upcoming tenders. Again, you'll find all slides at the end of this blog post.

## Milestones for 2022

The second half of the summit's morning was work-intensive for everyone: Together we collected and discussed your ideas for the upcoming year on a [scrumblr](https://github.com/aliasaria/scrumblr) board. Together with the Product Board, we will now process these in the coming weeks and transfer them to our [public Wekan board](https://ms.scs.sovereignit.de/wekan/b/Zi4PKHTuEhugB7bkX/release-planing-r2). We are already looking forward to tackling these milestones with you very soon!

<figure class="figure mx-auto d-block" style="width:100%">
  <a href="{{ assets["summit2021/scrumblr-goals-2022.png"].digest_path }}">
    {% asset 'summit2021/scrumblr-goals-2022.png' class="figure-img w-100" %}
  </a>
</figure>

## Retrospective and State of the Community 2021

The afternoon was kicked off with the results from the past retrospective as well as the results of the community survey *State of the Community 2021*.

{% include summit2021/sotc2021.html %}

## Organizing the development

In the group working phase, the organization of our development work was the most frequent out of originally four topics. The results of an intensive two-hour discussion were again recorded in a Scrumblr board.

<figure class="figure mx-auto d-block" style="width:100%">
  <a href="{{ assets["summit2021/scrumblr-organizing.png"].digest_path }}">
    {% asset 'summit2021/scrumblr-organizing.png' class="figure-img w-100" %}
  </a>
</figure>

## Thank you! ❤

Thank you all for participating in this year's Community Summit, which was a great end of an eventful year for SCS. Most importantly, we thank you for believing in our idea, supporting our project, and contributing to the success of the Sovereign Cloud Stack project. Without you, none of this would have been possible!

{% asset 'summit2021/christmas.png' class="my-5 w-50 mx-auto d-block" vips:resize=500x style="max-width:500px;" %}

## Downloads

{% for item in site.data.summit2021 %}
<div class="list-group-item list-group-item-action d-flex flex-row align-items-start">
  <div class="ms-2 me-4 my-auto">
    <a class="mt-1 text-decoration-none text-secondary stretched-link" href="{% asset '{{item.url}}' @path %}" target="_blank">
        <i class="fa {{item.icon}}"></i>
    </a>
  </div>
  <div>
    {{item.title}}{% if item.speakers %} — <div class="d-inline small fw-light">{{item.speakers}}</div>{%endif%}
  </div>
</div>
{% endfor %}
