---
layout: post
title:  "Sovereign Cloud Stack Security Note on bind9 DoS (CVE-2022-3094, -3736, -3924)"
category: security
hide_on_carousel: true
author:
  - "Christian Berendt"
  - "Kurt Garloff"
  - "Felix Kronlage-Dammers"
avatar:
  - "CB.png"
  - "kgarloff.jpg"
  - "fkr.jpg"
about:
  - "garloff"
  - "fkr"
---

## The vulnerability

On 2023-01-25, three vulnerabilities in bind9, a popular DNS server implementation,
were reported. Summarizing the [Ubuntu Security Notice](https://ubuntu.com/security/notices/USN-5827-1):

* [CVE-2022-3094](https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2022-3094):
  A large number of UPDATE messages can lead to resource exhaustion.
  The impact of unauthenticated messages is comparable to normal queries
  and thus uncritical; authenticated messages however have a higher
  impact.

* [CVE-2022-3736](https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2022-3736):
  Specially crafted RRSIG queries can cause bind9 to crash.

* [CVE-2022-3924](https://ubuntu.com/security/CVE-2022-3924):
  bind9 servers that are configured to respond to queries from stale
  cache entries may be caused to crash.

All three vulnerabilities thus allow remote Denial of Service (DoS)
attacks; the first one though only for trusted parties that can send
authenticated UPDATE messages. No information disclosure or privilege
escalation was found.

## Impact on the SCS reference implementation

The Designate service (DNS as a Service in OpenStack) is an optional feature of
the [Sovereign Cloud Stack](https://scs.community/) IaaS reference
implementation (by [OSISM](https://osism.tech/). Operators can choose to
expose the used bind9 DNS server to the VMs and the internet directly or
use it to feed a dedicated DNS service.

If the bind9 service is exposed, it could be vulnerable to the DoS attacks. 

The operators we work closely with are using the stable version (currently
R3, aka v4.x) of the reference implementation, which comes with OpenStack
yoga and container images built with Ubuntu 20.04 LTS (focal). Most
of our partners have recently upgraded to v4.2.0 to address
[CVE-2022-47951](https://scs.community/security/2023/01/24/cve-2022-47951/).

For Ubuntu 20.04, only CVE-2022-3094 applies. Authenticated UPDATE messages
to bind9 can be generated from a user by manipulating the zone records
in Designate via API calls. In our assessement, we deem it unlikely that
it can be done at a rate that results in a successful DoS. The attacker
would obviously also be identifiable.

Operators using the main development branch of OSISM (which includes
container images with OpenStack Zed based on Ubuntu 22.04) are affected
by all three vulnerabilities if they expose bind9 directly. They
thus may experience successful DoS attacks until they address the issue.

## Fixes and recommendations

Package updates from Ubuntu have been released.
Users using it to operate their own DNS service obviously should install
the updates.

SCS operators: Do we do updated containers for v4.2.x: CHRISTIAN TO FILL IN WHAT ARE OUR PLANS?
WHAT SHOULD PROVIDERS DO IF THEY ARE WORRIED ABOUT CVE-2022-3094?

SCS operators that use the main branch should ensure that their update
process works to pick up and deploy the regularly rebuilt container
images from OSISM's main branch.

## Version history

* Quick security note, v0.5, 2022-01-27, 11:45 CET.
