---
layout: post
title: "SCS R6 release candidate planning"
author:
  - "Kurt Garloff"
avatar:
  - "garloff"
about:
  - "garloff"
image: "blog/roadmap-r6.png"
---

## Roadmap to SCS release 6

The [Sovereign Cloud Stack](https://scs.community/) project is developed continously.
Continuous testing ensures that the latest code remains usable most of the time.
To better serve our cloud provider partners that have limited appetite for change
and are not very tolerant against occasional breakage, we publish releases.

Every 6 months, there is a new major release -- this is the time where major
improvements get integrated and where we move to the latest proven versions of the
many upstream projects we work on and contribute to. This is also where we occasionally
have to introduce breaking changes -- obviously something that we don't do easily and
that we carefully communicate by deprecation announcements well ahead of time.

In between those major releases we publish several minor releases that bring incremental
improvements as well as bug and security fixes.

## Sidenote: SCS Standards releases

The technologies used in SCS allow for very flexible configuration. This is great!
On the flipside, platforms composed of a very similar set of technologies can look
different to users and applications, resulting in extra effort to get accustomed
to each platform and sometimes significant effort to automate workloads, especially
if these want to achieve high availability. The SCS project aims to provide a high
degree of portability between SCS-compatible platforms by defining standards.
These are built on top of existing upstream standards and define further aspects
of platform behavior that application developers need.

The SCS software release does obviously implement all the SCS Standards by default;
however the standards can also be fulfilled by independent implementations. The release
cycle of standards is not tightly coupled with the software release. This would
only be needed if a new implementation is required to meet new standards. While
this can happen, it is an exception.

The SCS project is currently finalizing a new set of standard scopes: The version 4
of our [SCS-compatible standards](https://docs.scs.community/standards]) on the IaaS
layer and the first version of SCS standards
on the Container (Kubernetes) layer. We encourage software developers, DevOps Teams
and Providers alike to look at the
[ongoing work](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/standards/), provide
feedback and contribute to the
[standardization process](https://docs.scs.community/standards/scs-0001-v1-sovereign-cloud-standards).

With this out of the way, let's turn back to our upcoming release.

## Release Candidates

While our CI pipelines do nightly verification of the built software, we
encourage our cloud service provider partners to do additional testing, especially
ahead of a release. There are always issues that are specific to the setups and
configurations of our partners that can not always be found in our nightly pipielines.
In the end, upgrading test and staging platforms ahead of a release also provides
our partners with the experience and confidence in the upgrade process, so we can
not only produce high quality releases, but also have our partners upgrade their
production platforms quickly.

After discussion with our partners, for R6, we have determined to create a more
formal release candidate cadence and a more formalized test results collection
than we used to, reflecting the increasing size of our provider ecosystem as well
as the increasing size of our larger partners' environments.

Extending our [previous announcement](https://scs.community/tech/2023/11/22/scs-release6-upcoming/)
of the R6 release, we have come up with the following schedule for release candidates:

| R6 RC |    ETA     | notes      |
|-------|------------|------------|
| RC0   | 2024-02-07 | aka 7.0.0a |
| RC1   | 2024-02-21 |            |
| RC2   | 2024-03-06 |            |
| RC3   | 2024-03-13 | may not be needed and be skipped |
| RCx   | 2024-03-1y | if needed in order to retest |
| final | 2024-03-20 | aka 7.0.0  |

Note that with the first release candidate (RC0), the large features have
all been completed, been integrated and must be working. We still
work on improving documentation, increasing test coverage and of course
on fixing bugs.
We may grant a small number of exceptions to this rule for so-called late
features to be complete after RC0 (typically with RC1) and we will
make these transparent to our testers to avoid wasting effort.

## Late features (high level view)

The focus for RC0 is to test the upgrade on the IaaS layer, where OSISM has
integrated the new OpenStack version 2023.2 (aka Bobcat). We have some
work pending in the IAM area and on the container layer where we have the
exciting new technology with Cluster Stacks. Both can be tested already,
but will receive a few more changes until RC1. One of the areas of R6 where
we may not achieve 100% completion is to cover all cases where Kubernetes
Clusters are migrated from the old cluster-API based K8s-as-a-Service
solution (KaaS v1) to the new cluster stacks (also built on top of cluster-API).
Expect improvements here until later release candidates and
read the release notes to understand which scenarios are covered and which
ones may not be covered by full automation yet when we finalize R6.

The high level goals for R6 are documented in the
[R6 outcomes](https://scs.community/2023/12/29/scs-r6-enables/) blog article.
A more finegrained list of features is collected in the R6 release notes that
will get more and more complete over the next weeks.

## Matrix

The developmemt teams are very focused to respond quickly to issues reported
against our release candidates. We'd like to ask testers to open issues in
github against the relevant repositories as usual. To facilitate quick and
more interactive communication, we also invite testers and developers to
join the [SCS | Release Engineering and Testing R6 Matrix room](https://matrix.to/#/#scs-r6-releng:matrix.org) to stay atop of
announcements, reports and responses that come in.

