---
layout: post
title: "Review of the 2nd Sovereign Cloud Stack Summit"
author:
  - "Marc Schöchlin"
avatar:
  - "scoopex.jpg"
about:
  - "scoopex"
# https://jekyllcodex.org/without-plugin/slider/
carousels:
  - images:
    - image: 01_willkommen.jpg
    - image: 02_foyer.jpg
    - image: 03_keynote_peter_ganten_2.jpeg
    - image: 04_ernst_stoeckl-pukall_1.jpeg
    - image: 05_keynote_ann-cathrin_riedel_1.jpg
    - image: 06_panel_vormittag.jpg
    - image: 07_andreas_reckert-lodde.jpeg
    - image: 08_opendesk-scs.jpg
    - image: 09_publikum.jpg
    - image: 10_kurt_garloff.jpg
    - image: 11_sh_setzt_auf_scs.jpeg
    - image: 19_zukunft_scs.jpg
---

{% include carousel.html dir="images/summit2024/recap" height="40" unit="%" duration="5" number="1" %}

On May 14, 2024, the time had come again: The 2nd Sovereign Cloud Stack Summit took place at Villa Elisabeth in Berlin. The landmarked and spacious building and the adjacent beautiful park provided the perfect backdrop for this important event for us. As soon as we entered the venue, it was clear that this was going to be a special day.

## A varied and top-class program

With at least 200 visitors, our summit was very well attended. It was fascinating to see how many people were interested in the latest developments in the Sovereign Cloud Stack and used our get-together to exchange ideas intensively and enthusiastically.

The [program](https://scs.community/de/summit2024/) itself was super diverse and varied. Numerous top-class presentations and exciting speakers ensured a day full of informative and inspiring moments. It was impressive to see how much interest and goodwill there was from all sides - a clear sign that the Sovereign Cloud Stack is hitting the nerve of the times.

If you weren't able to be there or simply want to remind yourself of some of the content,
we have made sure that you can find the videos of the presentations and also the presentation slides on the [conference page](https://scs.community/de/summit2024/) and also soon on [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/@sovereigncloudstack).

The catering was also great: delicious food and attentive staff, who always endeavored to provide us with the best possible service, rounded off the experience. This also contributed significantly to the positive atmosphere of the event.


## Diversity and networking at a high level

It was particularly pleasing to meet so many different discussion partners from a wide range of sectors. The support for the Sovereign Cloud Stack was therefore evident on many levels:

- **Political support**: A clear commitment to the importance and future viability of the project.
- **Cloud providers**: Some are already using the reference implementation of the Sovereign Cloud Stack, others adapted the standards.
- **Companies**: SCS as a sustainable, sovereign and future-proof basis for private clouds.
- Government bodies and administrative organizations**: SCS as a decisive foundation for the much-needed digitization of the public sector

This broad backing clearly shows that the Sovereign Cloud Stack has arrived in the cloud community and enjoys trust at many levels.


## A look into the future

During the summit, the importance and future of the Sovereign Cloud Stack after the funding period was also presented([Slides](slides/22_ganten_Zukunft-SCS-20240514.pdf) and [Video](TODO)) and discussed. The high level of trust that the project has already earned was clearly noticeable. It was fantastic to meet so many familiar faces from the Sovereign Cloud Stack ecosystem and share progress.

We are already looking forward to the next Summit, which is expected to take place on Thursday, May 8, 2025. We are working intensively on our own observations and the positive feedback we have received. Our aim is to put on an even better and more interesting event next year.

## Your feedback is needed!

We are very interested in your opinion, ideas for improvement and, of course, constructive criticism. Please send your feedback by email to [scs@osb-alliance.com](mailto:scs@osb-alliance.com). This will enable us to further develop the Sovereign Cloud Stack Summit and continue to establish the event as an outstanding event in the cloud community in the future.

Thanks to everyone who made this day so special, first and foremost Regina, Alex, Friederike, Bianca and Miriam and Marius.

We would also like to thank you for your interest and participation: Thank you for being there! See you next year!

**Your Sovereign Cloud Stack Team**

