---
layout: post
title:  "Rookify: Migrating from Ceph-Ansible to Rook"
category: tech
author:
- "Rafael te Boekhorst"
avatar:
- "rboekhorst.jpg"
about:
- "rboekhorst.jpg"
---

## Migrating from Ceph-Ansible to Rook with Rookify

To facilitate the transition from Ceph-Ansible to Rook, SCS has almost finished developing a migration tool called [Rookify](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/rookify). This tool simplifies and streamlines the migration process, making it easier for users to switch from a Ceph-Ansible deployment to Rook. The tool is now under first technical preview and is being tested.

### Features and Design

#### Statemachine

Rookify is a python package that uses a **state-machine approach** based on the [transitions-library](https://github.com/pytransitions/transitions) to migrate the various resources such as mons, mgrs, osds, mds and anything else, to Rook. Each of these resources has a corresponding [module](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/rookify/tree/main/src/rookify/modules) in Rookify, which can be executed  independently or in combination with other modules.

It’s important to note that most modules have dependencies on other modules and will implicitly run them as needed. For example, the `mgirate-mons`-module needs the `analyze-ceph` module to run first (as indicated by the [REQUIRES variable]((https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/rookify/blob/main/src/rookify/modules/migrate_monitors/main.py))).This is necessary for Rookify to determine the current location of the mons and where they should be migrated to.

Rookify can be configured by editing a comprehensive `config.yml` file, such as the provided [confing.example.yaml](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/rookify/blob/main/config.example.yaml). This configuration file specifies various configuration-dependencies (like SSH keys, Kubernetes and Ceph configurations) and allows users to easily decide which modules should be run (see the `migration_modules` section below). 

#### A simple CLI and Pickle support

Rookify optionally (and recommended) supports using a **pickle-file** (see on top below the `general` section in config.example.yaml). [Pickle](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pickle.html) is a modle for object serialization that saves the state of progress externally, i.e. which modules have been run and a map with informations aboutthe target machine. New features are currently in development to enhance the existing CLI interface, allowing it to read the pickle file and use Rookify's modules to report the exact state of the migration process. This means that Rookify can continue from where a discontinued or partially failed migration left off.

Currently, Rookify only offers a straightforward CLI interface:

```
usage: Rookify [-h] [--dry-run]

options:
  -h, --help  show this help message and exit
  --dry-run
```

#### Rookify's workflow: how does it get the job done?

Rookify's main function is to migrate all of Ceph's resources to Rook. Let's take a look at the migration_modules section in the config.yml file:

```
migration_modules:
- migrate_mons
```

This configuration instructs Rookify to perform the following steps:

1. Preflight Mode: The migrate_mons module first runs in a preflight mode, which can also be manually triggered using the rookify --dry-run command. During this phase, Rookify checks the execution state from the pickle file. If the migration has already been successfully completed, the module stops here.

The `analyze-ceph` module collects data the running Cephs resources and of kubernetes with the running rook-operator. It optionally saves the finding in a pickle-file. The `analyze-ceph` module will also first run in `preflight`-mode and check if state has already been captured in the pickle file: if there is no state, then `ceph-analyze` will striphe to gather the needed information.

2. Dependency Check: If the migrate_mons module has not been run before (indicated by an empty pickle file), Rookify checks for dependencies, e.g. other modules that need to be run first. It execute those modules, first in preflight mode and then for real. The state of each module will optionally be saved in the pickle file.

2.1 `ceph-analyze` module: Rookify identifies that the `analyze-ceph` module needs to be run first in any case. The `analyze-ceph` module collects data on the running Ceph resources and the Kubernetes environment with the Rook operator. Note that, like any other module, `ceph-analyze` first runs in preflight mode to check if the state has already been captured in the pickle file. If no state is found, `analyze-ceph` gathers the necessary information.

2.1 Cluster Creation: After successfully running the analyze-ceph` module, Rookify will check for other dependencies, such as the `create-cluster` module. This module creates the cluster map for Rook based on information from `analyze-ceph` and sets up the necessary namespaces in Kubernetes.

3. Migration Execution: Following the successful execution of `analyze_ceph` and `create_cluster`, the `migrate_mons`-module is executed. Rookify shuts down the first running Ceph monitor on the first worker node using `sudo systemctl disable --now ceph-mon.target` and immediately activates the equivalent monitor in Rook by setting its metadata in the clustermap.yaml to true.

5. Monitor Migration: Rookify continues this process for each monitor until all have been migrated to Rook and are running. Optionally, the state can be saved in the pickle file.

Depending on what resources you want to migrate, rookify will use a similar approach: it will try to switch of the ceph resource after it has made sure that it can re-create an equivalent in the rook cluster.

## Test run: Give it a try and help with testing process

In order to give rookify a testspinn make sure to checkout the [README.md](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/rookify/blob/main/README.md) in the repository.

If you would like to try out and test the current state of rookify (much apprciated, feel free to add any [issues](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/rookify/issues) to github), you can use the testbed of OSISM. 

### Testbed setup

_NOTE_: The Testbed of OSISM is for the use of testing. This means that it is inherently unstable. If ceph and k3s cannot be deployed without failure, you will have to wait for a fix of the testbed or find a work around yourself to test rookify (For example: OSISM also offers a more stable testing setup called  [Cloud in a box](https://osism.tech/docs/guides/other-guides/cloud-in-a-box/). I will try to add another blog entry for that setup on another occasion).

In order to setup the testbed, first consult [osism's testbed-documentation](https://osism.tech/docs/guides/other-guides/testbed) to check the needed requirements. If all is fine, then you can clone the repository and use `make ceph` to setup a ceph-testbed. `Make ceph` will autmatically pull the needed ansible roles, prepare a venv-environment, build infrastructure with OpenStack, create a manager-node and then deploy ceph on 3 worker-nodes:

```bash
git clone github.com:osism/testbed.git
make ceph
```

After the needed infrastructure for ceph and the testbed has been deployed, login with `make login` and deploy k3s as well as a rook-operator:

```bash
make login 
osism apply k3s
osism apply rook-operator
```

If you now would want to adapt some other configuraton, e.g. some Rook configuration, then see `/opt/configuration/environments/rook/` and checkout OSISM's documentation on rook [here](https://osism.tech/docs/guides/configuration-guide/rook) for the various settings.

## Rookify Setup/Configuration for OSISM's Testbed

**First**: clone the rookify directory, then setup rookify and build the python package for venv with the help of the makefile. Note: You can simply run `make` without any arguments, to see a list of helper functions that can help you to setup up and configure rookify.
`make setup` downloads the needed venv libraries and then installs the rookify package into .venv/bin/rookify of the working directory:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/rookify
cd rookify
make setup
```

_NOTE_: some error concerning the absence of the `python-rados`-libary might pop up. You can run `check-radoslib` to ensure that the library is installed locally on you pc, if not then install the package manually. The python-rados libary should have version 2.0.0 as of the writing of this blog (check the README.md file of rookify for more up-to-date documentation). The library could not be integrated within the setup, because ceph offers currently no builds for pip.

**Second**: copy `config.example.osism.yml` to `config.yml` and adapt the various configuration settings as needed. Rookify will need access to an ssh-key (e.g. the `.id.rsa` file in the `terraform` directory in the testbed repository), ceph configuration files (see e.g. `/etc/ceph/` on one of the worker-nodes) and k8s files (e.g. `~/.kube/config` from the manager node). Check if the makefile contains any helper-functions to asisst you: simply run `make` in the root of the working directory to see all options that the makefile offers. 

_Very important_: make sure rookify can connect to the testbed. In order to do this we will use one of the testbeds built-in vpns:

```
# you can use sshuttle
make vpn-sshuttle
# or you can use wireguard
make vpn-wireguard # requires you to run make vpn-wireguard-config first
``

**third**: run rookify to test it. Rookify allows the usage of `--dry-run` which runs modules in test mode. Note that rookify always runs the various modules in test mode first and only then continues to use them truly. In any case, it is safe to run the `example` module or the `analyze-ceph` module, as these will not make any real changes.
In the following we will try to run `analyze-ceph` and try to save its collected state in a pickle-file. Make sure you have something similar as the following `config.yml`, especially note the sections denoting configuration files for ceph, ssh and k8s, then make sure that you set the module to execute in the section `migration_modules`:

```yaml
general:
  machine_pickle_file: data.pickle

logging:
  level: INFO # level at which logging should start
  format:
    time: "%Y-%m-%d %H:%M.%S" # other example: "iso"
    renderer: console # or: json

ceph:
  config: ./.ceph/ceph.conf
  keyring: ./.ceph/ceph.client.admin.keyring

# fill in correct path to private key
ssh:
  private_key: /home/USER/.ssh/cloud.private
  hosts:
    testbed-node-0:
      address: 192.168.16.10
      user: dragon
    testbed-node-1:
      address: 192.168.16.11
      user: dragon
    testbed-node-2:
      address: 192.168.16.12
      user: dragon

kubernetes:
  config: ./k8s/config

rook:
  cluster:
    name: osism-ceph
    namespace: rook-ceph
    mds_placement_label: node-role.osism.tech/rook-mds
    mgr_placement_label: node-role.osism.tech/rook-mgr
    mon_placement_label: node-role.osism.tech/rook-mon
    osd_placement_label: node-role.osism.tech/rook-osd
    rgw_placement_label: node-role.osism.tech/rook-rgw
  ceph:
    image: quay.io/ceph/ceph:v18.2.1

migration_modules: # this sets the modules that need to be run. Note that some of the modules require other modules to be run as well, this will happen automatically.
- analyze_ceph
```

If all is good you can give it a go by running running rookify without any arguments:

```bash
.venv/bin/rookify --dry-run
# or simply
.venv/bin/rookify # the analyze_ceph module is not expected to break anything
```

If all is setup correctly you might see an output similar to this:

```bash

```




